

[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]

I appreciate this opportunity to appear before the Banking Committee

today to address certain recent reports on the Federal Reserve´s operations.  Of most

relevance, the GAO has raised some significant issues with respect to the

management of the Federal Reserve System.  Both the GAO and the Congress

deserve our full response.

[SECTION]

We are strongly committed to ensuring that the Federal Reserve System

is managed efficiently and effectively.  It is most important to us at the Federal

Reserve Board and the Reserve Banks, not only to run a  tight ship,  but to foster the

attitudes and processes that will ensure continuous improvement in the effectiveness

of the Federal Reserve´s operations.  We recognize that spending non-appropriated

funds places a special obligation on us to be particularly diligent in the use and

application of those funds.

[SECTION]

Accordingly, even though we may ultimately disagree with some of the

specific suggestions of the GAO, we welcome all of them and their insights because

they require us to rethink our positions and change them, if appropriate.  Certain GAO

recommendations for review of specific aspects of our management clearly have merit

and reviews of a number of issues highlighted in the GAO´s report are currently

underway.  These reviews may lead to changes in the Federal Reserve´s

administration that will further enhance our effectiveness.

[SECTION]

It is most important for any organization, including the Federal Reserve,

periodically to reassess its businesses and how they are carried out.   Strategic

planning is particularly critical given our rapidly changing environment, in which

technology is advancing at an extraordinary pace and the financial services industry is

becoming ever more complex.  It is essential that the Federal Reserve adapt to this

changing environment with some foresight and as effectively as possible.  To that end,

in 1995 we formalized our strategic focus by establishing a System Strategic Planning

Coordinating Group to assess how the Federal Reserve can most effectively meet its

public policy objectives into the next century.

[SECTION]

Our strategic focus is also reflected in recent significant changes that the

Federal Reserve has made in the way it carries out its major responsibilities.  For

example, we have undertaken a major redesign and upgrade of our computer

systems, communications networks, and critical software applications to improve

reliability, respond more quickly to changing business requirements, and improve our

disaster recovery capabilities.  We have placed an increasing reliance on automation

to provide a more flexible approach to bank examinations -- an approach that is risk-oriented, cost-effective, and sensitive to the burden placed on banks.  We have also

consolidated certain fiscal agency functions that we provide for the government in

order to improve cost effectiveness and quality, and a Reserve Bank policy committee

has been established to coordinate the provision of Federal Reserve financial

services.

[SECTION]

In addition, the Federal Reserve already had underway several specific

initiatives related to recommendations made by the GAO.  For example, we recently

engaged an independent accounting firm to audit and certify the combined financial

statements of the Reserve Banks.  The firm issued an unqualified opinion on the 1995

financial statements, as prepared in accordance with the financial accounting manual

for the Reserve Banks.  In addition, we are actively reviewing the appropriate

infrastructure for providing certain financial services, taking into consideration both

cost efficiency and service quality.  One difficult issue that has and will confront the

Federal Reserve Board in our oversight of the System is the appropriate degree of

consolidation of various activities. Certain Systemwide activities do appear to be more

cost effective if consolidated.  For example, we anticipate that the consolidation of our

critical electronic payment applications will reduce our costs of providing these

services.  But it is also evident that the element of autonomy that is accorded to the

Reserve Banks has created an environment within the Federal Reserve that attracts

highly qualified staff who contribute importantly to the effectiveness and efficiency of

the Federal Reserve System over the long run.  The advantages of this environment

must be balanced against the possible savings from consolidation.

[SECTION]

Federal Reserve´s Role as Service Provider
           Many of our resources are devoted to providing priced payment services.

The Federal Reserve has played an integral role in the nation´s payments system

since the System´s inception.  Indeed, one of Congress´ original goals in establishing

the Federal Reserve System was to improve the efficiency of check clearing.  Prior to

the passage of the Monetary Control Act in 1980, the Federal Reserve provided

payment services to its member banks; the banks paid for these services implicitly

with non-interest bearing reserves rather than through explicit fees.  The MCA

fundamentally changed the manner in which the Federal Reserve provided and

received payment for these services.

[SECTION]

Because the Act expanded reserve requirements to all depository

institutions, it also required that the Federal Reserve offer its payment services to all

depository institutions.  To offset the Act´s reduction in the level of required reserves,

as well as to broaden and level the competitive market for interbank payment services,

Congress required us to price our services at full cost with a rate of return comparable

to that of private firms.  I believe that the increased competition resulting from the

MCA requirements has benefited the payments system.

[SECTION]

The GAO has recommended that we review our future role in providing

payment services.  We are in the process of conducting such a review in the context

of our overall strategic plan.  In general, we view our role as a payments service

provider as crucial in carrying out our overall central bank mission.  We believe it is

important for the Federal Reserve to foster the integrity, efficiency, and accessibility of

the U.S. dollar payments system, which in turn is important to maintain financial

stability and maximize sustainable economic growth.  The provision of services by the

Federal Reserve has contributed directly to these goals.  In addition, the knowledge

and operational expertise we have gained as a service provider strengthens our efforts

in containing systemic risks and is crucial in managing potential financial crises.

[SECTION]

We regard the wholesale payments services we provide, such as

Fedwire and net settlement, as essential central bank services and important in

limiting payments system risk.  Our role in providing these services probably will not

change significantly as the marketplace evolves, although the nature of the services

themselves might.

[SECTION]

It is quite possible, if not likely, that as changes occur in the financial

services marketplace over time, or owing to other considerations, our role in providing

other services, such as check collection, may change as well.  In this regard, we must

be sensitive to the fact that, as the nation´s central bank, we have an unsurpassable

credit rating that must not be used to unfairly compete with private-sector providers.

We are continually assessing our available means of achieving our payments system

goals, including our regulatory authority and our role as a direct participant in the

payments system, with our public service role always kept paramount.  For example,

the Federal Reserve has adopted regulations that have fostered competition and

efficiency in the provision of check collection services, even though they resulted in a

reduction in the Federal Reserve´s direct participation in the check system.  At the

same time, the Federal Reserve has encouraged other efficiencies in the payments

system through innovations in its service offerings.  To the extent that we can achieve

our payments system goals most effectively through our direct participation, our

continued provision of these services will remain appropriate.

[SECTION]

Federal Reserve Cost Effectiveness
           In considering the cost structure of the Federal Reserve, it is necessary

to keep in mind the unique combination of responsibilities that have been assigned to

this institution.  The Federal Reserve is responsible for conducting monetary policy;

supervising and regulating certain financial institutions; promoting the efficiency and

integrity of the payments system; and providing fiscal agency services to the Treasury

and other government agencies at their direction.

[SECTION]

Different factors affect the cost structure of each of these functions. For

example, priced services are subject to the inherent discipline of the marketplace as

the Federal Reserve must control costs in order to meet the statutory directives for

cost recovery in the Monetary Control Act.  On the other hand, in providing depository

and fiscal services to the Treasury, the Federal Reserve must respond to the

instructions of the Treasury.  We endeavor to carry out Treasury's directives in a cost

effective manner, but cannot refuse legitimate requests because of their effect on our

costs or because they are inconsistent with other Federal Reserve plans.  In the areas

of monetary policy and financial institution supervision, there are fewer external

constraints on our expenses.  Here we must be particularly vigilant.

[SECTION]

Given the critical nature of the Federal Reserve´s responsibilities,

particularly in the areas of monetary policy, financial stability, and financial institution

supervision, our major initiatives must be judged not only in terms of cost but also in

the context of risk management and the appropriate level of resources to be devoted

to each function.  For example, Congress, in enacting the Foreign Bank Supervision

Enhancement Act in 1991, clearly concluded that the additional costs of expanding the

Federal Reserve´s supervisory responsibilities for U.S. operations of foreign banks

were justified by the greater financial stability and protection that the enhanced

supervision would bring.

[SECTION]

We focus our banking examination resources based on risk

assessments, with the expectation that areas not covered extensively in the

examinations will not become serious problems.  Had we devoted more resources to

Daiwa, and perhaps less elsewhere, would we have uncovered its wrongdoing at an

early stage?  We can´t know for sure, but the odds would have been higher.  But, if

we had the foresight to divert these resources from other activities, would we have

increased our risk exposure elsewhere?

[SECTION]

As another example, the Federal Reserve´s recent investment in a major

upgrade of our computer systems and personnel to adapt our surveillance and

payments technologies to the major changes that have occurred in private financial

markets was also driven in large part to improve risk management.  While the costs of

these improvements were not trivial, they have enhanced our ability to ensure the

smooth functioning of the financial markets, even during periods of financial or

operational disruptions.  To hold the risk of systemic crises to acceptably low levels in

both U.S. markets and U.S. dollar markets abroad requires some redundancy of

resources.  Given the vast scale of the value of payment transactions that flow

through our systems--our Fedwire volume alone averages almost $1.5 trillion a day--

we believe that the benefits of this redundancy far exceed the associated incremental

costs.

[SECTION]

The risk-management decisions that we make concerning the way we

provide payment services to depository institutions are tested directly in the

marketplace.  These services comprise more than one-third of the Federal Reserve

Banks´ total budget and the Monetary Control Act requires that, over the long run, we

price these services to recover their costs, as well as costs that would be borne by

private businesses, such as taxes and a return on equity.  If we provide these services

inefficiently, we price ourselves out of the market.

[SECTION]

Over the past decade, our track record has been good.  The Reserve

Banks have recovered 101 percent of their total cost of providing priced services,

including the targeted return on equity.  I should also note that, by recovering not only

our actual costs but also the imputed costs that a private firm would incur, the Federal

Reserve´s priced services have consistently contributed to the amount we have

transferred to the Treasury.  During the past decade, priced services revenue has

exceed operating costs by almost $1 billion.

[SECTION]

Our fiscal agency services, which comprise another one-sixth of the

Reserve Banks´ total budget, are provided at the direction of the Treasury and other

federal government agencies for whom we provide these services and whose

reimbursements to us are made primarily with appropriated funds.   Here our difficulty

has been in obtaining full reimbursement over the years.  We understand that, as part

of its FY97 funding request, the Treasury sought a permanent indefinite appropriation,

similar to that in place for the Bureau of the Public Debt, for services provided to its

Financial Management Service.  The Federal Reserve and our fiscal principals

continue to work closely to identify and implement initiatives that improve further the

efficiency of these operations.

[SECTION]

With respect to staff compensation and some other aspects of our

infrastructure that are necessary to support our varied responsibilities, only indirect

market criteria are available to judge the Federal Reserve´s costs.  For example, we

try to set salary structures that can attract and retain the personnel with skills

necessary to run the Federal Reserve System in a highly effective manner.  In order

to acquire and hold such personnel, we strive to provide salaries and benefits

competitive with local private and public sector markets, tempered by the willingness

of many professionals to accord a nonmonetary premium to Federal Reserve

employment.  Although the GAO report suggests that the Federal Reserve does not

adequately review Federal Reserve employee salary and benefit levels to determine

whether they continue to be justified, I can assure the Committee that these costs are

scrutinized regularly to ensure that they are appropriate.

[SECTION]

We believe that the GAO´s comparison of growth in Federal Reserve

employee benefits with those of the federal government is incorrect.  The problem is

that while we accrue such benefits according to generally accepted accounting

principles (GAAP), the federal government does not.  Were the federal government to

use accrual accounting, presumably the comparisons would be straightforward.  The

federal government, however, employs an outmoded cash accounting system, which

makes it difficult for us to reverse our accruals in a manner consistent with it.  As best

we can judge, when calculated on a comparable basis using federal government

accounting principles, the cost of benefits per employee for the Federal Reserve and

the federal government increased by approximately the same percentage during the

1988 to 1994 period

-- 64 percent and 62 percent, respectively.  We believe the GAO significantly

overstated the increase in Federal Reserve benefit costs by including the cost of

future pension benefits related to Federal Reserve early retirement plans on an

accrual basis without considering the associated future savings attributable to those

programs.  Each of the early retirement programs has a positive net present value,

indicating a net cost savings from such plans.  Including the present value cost of

early retirement plans without considering the present value of cost savings skews any

comparison of the increase in total benefits costs for the Federal Reserve and federal

government.

[SECTION]

Applying peer analysis more broadly, during the 1988 to 1994 period

reviewed by the GAO, the increase in Federal Reserve operating costs was slightly

less than the 51 percent increase in federal discretionary non-defense spending, which

has been subject to increasing Congressional restraint in recent years.  The GAO

makes this as one of its comparisons.  The Federal Reserve effectively contained its

costs despite a significant expansion in its mandated responsibilities and expanded

resources required to monitor and contain the financial market turmoil of that period.

To also compare, however, as the GAO did in its report, the rate of our expense

increases with that of total federal discretionary outlays, which are dominated by the

major post-cold war retrenchment in defense, is clearly inappropriate.  Moreover, with

the significant expansion of our computer systems now close to completion and our

adjustment to our expanded supervisory mandates reaching fruition, our costs during

the past two years and those projected for the immediate future are definitely on a

flattening trajectory.

[SECTION]

More generally, we believe that the GAO is mistaken in its notion that the

Federal Reserve does not regularly assess certain ongoing programs to determine

whether they are reasonable and justified.  In particular, we do not use a  current

services  approach to develop the Board and Reserve Bank budgets.   The significant

reallocation of System resources among the various responsibility areas during recent

years clearly demonstrates that this is not the case.

[SECTION]

In summary, although the Board believes that much of the GAO´s

analysis and recommendations have merit, we take exception to the broad implication

of the GAO report that the Federal Reserve has not exercised appropriate budget

constraint and that it has not adequately addressed the changing technological and

financial environment in which it operates.  In my experience, the Federal Reserve is

as well run an organization as any with which I have been associated, private or

public, over the decades.  Is there nonetheless room for improvement?  Certainly.  I

am not aware of any complex organization for which this is not the case.  In particular,

the Board plans to review several specific areas highlighted by the GAO related to

management of health care benefits, Reserve Bank procurement and contracting

procedures, and Reserve Bank travel reimbursement policies.

[SECTION]

The Federal Reserve Surplus
           One area discussed in the GAO report--the elimination or reduction of

the Federal Reserve´s surplus--has received substantial, and often misleading, media

coverage.  I agree with the assessment of the Conference Report on the FY97 budget

resolution on this matter.  The Report concluded that a transfer of the Federal

Reserve´s surplus to the Treasury would be a  gimmick  that  has no real economic

impact on the deficit.   While a transfer of Federal Reserve surplus would increase

 unified receipts  (because the Federal Reserve, for technical reasons, is not included

in the unified budget), it would nonetheless be an

intra-governmental transfer that would not change the government´s true economic

and financial position with respect to the private sector.

[SECTION]

The Federal Reserve holds government securities as the asset

counterpart to its surplus, interest on which it returns to the Treasury.  If the Federal

Reserve decreased its surplus, it would do so by selling government securities and

transferring the proceeds to the Treasury.  Consequently, the Federal Reserve´s future

payments to the Treasury would decline permanently by the foregone amount of

interest on the surplus funds transferred, exactly offsetting the Treasury´s savings on

gross interest payments.

[SECTION]

The surplus is part of our capital account.  In that context, I believe

retention by the Federal Reserve of some level of surplus is desirable, but I

acknowledge that the appropriate level of the Federal Reserve´s surplus is debatable.

We would welcome the opportunity to work with Congress to review this issue.

[SECTION]

Other Recent Inquiries
          I would like to conclude my testimony by commenting on several recent

inquiries into certain aspects of the Reserve Banks´ operations -- specifically, the

management of our Interdistrict Transportation System (ITS) and cash statistical

reporting problems experienced by the Los Angeles Branch of the Federal Reserve

Bank of San Francisco.

[SECTION]

Earlier this year, Representative Henry Gonzalez issued a report on the

administration of the Federal Reserve´s ITS network.  The report asserts that the

Federal Reserve may have violated the Monetary Control Act to the extent that it does

not fully recover the costs of ITS through revenue attributable to its use.  The GAO

and the courts reviewed this issue in the mid-1980s and concluded that such cost

recovery was not required by the Act.

[SECTION]

No integrated company in the private sector (such as one that provides

check collection services) prices individual segments of its operation to achieve a

uniform rate of return.  Optimum profitability, i.e., minimum consolidated costs, is

enhanced through transfer pricing flexibility.  Even aside from the imprecisions

associated with allocating fixed costs, it would not make sense for us to separately

recover the costs of each input to a service, such as transportation, data processing,

or labor, as implied by Representative Gonzalez.  Rather, all of the costs the Reserve

Banks incur in providing check services to depository institutions, including ITS costs

(which represent less than 5 percent of the costs of our check service), are recovered

through fees for their various check products.

[SECTION]

Representative Gonzalez´s report also alleges that certain contracting

practices used by the Boston Reserve Bank in managing ITS were improper and

wasteful.  Administration of ITS requires Federal Reserve management to make

numerous, rapid, and complex business decisions every day, constantly balancing

efforts to improve service, reduce float, and control operating costs.  In hindsight, are

there some decisions that should have been made differently?  Almost surely.  But

from a broad perspective, ITS has been managed effectively in our judgment.

[SECTION]

Finally, I would like to put in context the errors made by the Los Angeles

Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco in reporting certain statistical

cash information to the Federal Reserve Board.  Unfortunately, the press coverage of

this matter, in our judgment, has significantly overstated the problem.  First, these

reports are used for informational purposes only.  No taxpayer money has been lost.

No key decision-making has been compromised.  The errors have not affected the

usefulness of the information derived from the Federal Reserve´s financial statements,

nor have they affected the Federal Reserve´s calculation of the money supply, its

conduct of monetary policy, or the amount of shipments of currency and coin to or

from the Branch.

[SECTION]

Second, although there were reports of mistakes amounting to $178

million, the errors changed the Branch´s reported production volume by less than one-half of one percent.  If the mistakes had not been discovered, at worst there would

have been slight errors in forecasting future currency demand, which could have

caused a slight increase to the Federal Reserve´s order to the Treasury to print new

currency.  The cost of this higher currency print order would have been offset,

however, by a lower print order in the following year.

[SECTION]

Third, the Los Angeles Branch had identified the problems internally and

was in the process of resolving them before Representative Gonzalez began his

inquiry.  The Los Angeles Branch is working diligently to ensure that all of the data

used to prepare the cash statistical reports transmitted to the Board are accurate.

[SECTION]

In closing, let me state that we appreciate the GAO´s review in that it

assists us in our ongoing evaluation of the Federal Reserve´s structure and functions

and our efforts to continually improve operations.  As I noted, many recommendations

are useful and we are pursuing them.  In my opinion, however, the general tenor of

the report does not reflect the high level of effectiveness with which the Federal

Reserve has fulfilled its mission.  While, as is likely the case with any organization, the

Federal Reserve has opportunities for further improvement, I believe these

opportunities should be put in the context of our significant accomplishments.

[SECTION]



[SECTION]

Return to top

[SECTION]

1996 Testimony



Home | News and events 
Accessibility | Contact Us


Last update: July 26, 1996, 9:15 AM