Thank you for inviting me to report on the Federal Reserve's 
              activities in support of new currency design and coin distribution. 
              There has been a great deal of activity in the past few years. To 
              deter counterfeiting, in October 2003, the Reserve Banks issued 
              a redesigned $20 note, and on Monday, we helped unveil the design 
              for the new $50 note, which will be issued beginning this fall. 
              Last month, the Reserve Banks distributed the first of two new nickel 
              designs to be issued in 2004 as part of the Westward Journey series. 
              The Reserve Banks also continue to distribute a newly designed quarter 
              every ten weeks as part of the fifty-state quarter program. Before 
              turning to the specific issues raised by the Subcommittee, it may 
              be helpful to describe briefly the Federal Reserve's roles in currency 
              issuance and coin distribution.

[SECTION]

Currency Issuance and Coin Distribution 
              One of the Federal Reserve's key responsibilities is to ensure that 
              enough currency and coin is available to meet the public's needs. 
              In that role, the Reserve Banks provide wholesale cash--currency 
              and coin--services to depository institutions, which, in turn, provide 
              cash services to the general public.1

[SECTION]

Each year the Federal Reserve Board determines the need for new 
              currency, which it purchases from the Department of the Treasury's 
              Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP) at approximately the cost 
              of production. The Reserve Banks issue Federal Reserve notes at 
              face value, and these notes are recorded as liabilities on the Reserve 
              Banks' balance sheets. The Reserve Banks, as required by law, pledge 
              collateral (principally U.S. Treasury securities) equal to the face 
              value of currency in circulation. Federal Reserve notes accounted 
              for about 95 percent of the almost $716 billion of currency and 
              coin in circulation as of March 31, 2004. The Federal Reserve's 
              role in providing coins is more limited. The United States Mint 
              (the Mint) issues circulating coins that the Reserve Banks purchase 
              at face value and distribute, at the wholesale level, to depository 
              institutions. These institutions, in turn, provide coins to the 
              public. The Reserve Banks now distribute about 90 percent of coin 
              orders and deposits through operators of coin terminals, which are 
              predominantly armored carriers. Coins represent about five percent 
              of total currency and coin in circulation, or about $35 billion, 
              as of March 31, 2004.

[SECTION]

Currency Design
              Although the Secretary of the Treasury, and not the Federal Reserve, 
              has authority to approve new currency designs, the Federal Reserve 
              works actively and collaboratively with the Treasury, the Secret 
              Service, and the BEP to analyze and recommend counterfeit deterrence 
              strategies to the Secretary. We monitor and analyze currency flows 
              and counterfeiting data both domestically and internationally to 
              understand better the use of U.S. currency, as well as incidents 
              of counterfeiting. The Federal Reserve also maintains close contact 
              with commercial banks that provide currency internationally, as 
              well as with other central banks, to monitor counterfeiting activity 
              at the international level.

[SECTION]

Counterfeit-deterrent features in U.S. currency continue to evolve 
              to ensure public confidence in the security of Federal Reserve notes. 
              The Series-2004 design changes to the $20 note added complex colored 
              line patterns and a system to deter digital counterfeiting, while 
              maintaining the watermark, security thread, and color-shifting ink 
              of the 1996 design. Ongoing research is aimed at defending against 
              future threats, especially those posed by continued improvements 
              in, and the low-cost availability of, inkjet printers and other 
              devices used to digitally counterfeit U.S. currency. For instance, 
              the Federal Reserve and the BEP have devoted significant resources 
              to a twenty-seven nation effort, through the Bank for International 
              Settlements, to combat color copier and inkjet counterfeiting. The 
              Federal Reserve appreciates the assistance of a number of private 
              companies in the United States and abroad that have worked with 
              us voluntarily to deploy technology in their products that will 
              protect their customers and the public from the risks of counterfeit 
              currency. These efforts are a key component of the three-pronged 
              U.S. counterfeit deterrence strategy that relies on currency designs, 
              public education, and law enforcement. Although the focus of today's 
              hearing is primarily on design issues, I would like to emphasize 
              that public education and law enforcement also play a vital role 
              in counterfeit deterrence.

[SECTION]

Adjustments by Reserve Banks to Improve Coin Distribution
              Turning to recent experience with coins, for the past several years, 
              the Reserve Banks have worked to reduce inefficiencies by implementing 
              a program to manage their coin distribution from a national perspective. 
              For example, the Reserve Banks now provide the Mint with a single 
              monthly coin order for all districts, together with five-month projections 
              of future needs.2 
              The Reserve Banks have also worked closely with armored carriers 
              and depository institutions to understand their processes and constraints 
              in meeting the public demand for circulating commemorative coins. 
              The result is a better balance of coin inventories across the country.

[SECTION]

The Federal Reserve worked with the Mint to implement the popular 
              fifty state quarter program in 1999, the golden dollar coin in 2000, 
              and most recently, the Westward Journey nickel program. The fifty 
              state quarter and Westward Journey nickel programs have been both 
              innovative and challenging, as implied by the term "commemorative 
              circulating coin" that is used to describe the coins issued in the 
              programs. Innovative, because the goal is to satisfy the demand 
              for both a transactional and commemorative coin in a single coin, 
              which is distributed through the normal wholesale distribution channels 
              and whose design changes frequently. Challenging, because frequent 
              design changes have affected the Reserve Banks' inventory and payment 
              processes that are designed to meet wholesale demand efficiently. 
              Challenging also because heightened public expectations that circulating 
              commemoratives will be widely available can place added pressure 
              on the wholesale distribution system.

[SECTION]

To adjust to these new commemorative circulating coins, the Reserve 
              Banks have changed their payment practices. For example, as the 
              Mint issues each new coin design, Reserve Banks have suspended their 
              normal practice of first paying out previously circulated coins 
              to depository institutions, and instead have paid out the new designs 
              for initial introductory periods ranging from a few weeks to two 
              years, in the case of the golden dollar.

[SECTION]

Demand for Dollar Coins
              The Mint and the General Accounting Office (GAO) have identified 
              a number of factors that influence the demand for dollar coins. 
              The title of the GAO's 2002 report, New Dollar Coin Marketing 
              Campaign Raised Public Awareness but not Widespread Use, confirms 
              the Federal Reserve's experience in distributing dollar coins.3 
              Publicity campaigns and promotions raise public interest in coins 
              as collectibles but do not address the impediments to transactional 
              use. Table 1 provides a rough 
              estimate of the number of golden dollars available for use in transactions.

[SECTION]

The GAO reported a number of barriers to widespread circulation 
              of dollar coins, including the following:

[SECTION]

While all of these factors affect the demand for dollar coins, 
              surveys and reports consistently identify the dollar note as the 
              principal barrier to successful circulation of dollar coins. Nevertheless, 
              dollar coins are regularly used in certain markets. Overall for 
              2003, the Reserve Banks report average monthly dollar coin payments 
              of $15.2 million, average monthly receipts of $9.5 million, and 
              average monthly net payments of $5.7 million. Operators of vending 
              and Postal Service machines, public transit, and some toll roads 
              dispense dollar coins in change. The Reserve Banks' largest depository-institution 
              customers have indicated that public transit authorities and the 
              Postal Service are the principal users of dollar coins. Although 
              neither of these groups has expressed a preference for one design 
              of dollar coin over another, other businesses have requested that 
              Reserve Banks make available golden dollars segregated from Susan 
              B. Anthony (SBA) coins. Reserve Banks, however, do not sort individual 
              coins and have no machines that are able to distinguish between 
              the two types of circulating dollar coins.

[SECTION]

Susan B. Anthony coins, however, could be removed from circulation 
              if the Mint were to purchase dollar coins received by Reserve Banks 
              from circulation, sort the coins, and destroy the SBAs or place 
              them into long-term storage. We understand that the premise of such 
              a program is that the public's total demand for dollar coins could 
              increase if unmixed golden dollars were available rather than commingled 
              SBAs and golden dollars. In general, a program to remove SBAs from 
              circulation would need to consider the seigniorage that could be 
              gained from greater circulation of golden dollars in relation to 
              the costs of the program, and the potential savings to society from 
              an overall increase in the use of dollar coins relative to one-dollar 
              notes.

[SECTION]

Recent Experience with Dollar Coins, Quarters, and Nickels
              The recent experience of the Reserve Banks with changes in coin 
              design has generally been that inventories and operating costs for 
              coins have increased. Reserve Banks acquired sufficient inventories 
              of dollar coins in the first two years of golden dollar circulation 
              to satisfy the demand by depository institutions for most of the 
              following two years. Despite efforts by the Reserve Banks, the Mint, 
              and depository institutions to manage demand, inventories of quarters 
              at Reserve Banks are now more than triple their 1999 level. From 
              1999 to 2003, Reserve Bank direct costs for distributing coins have 
              increased at an average annual rate of about 12 percent, three times 
              the rate of Reserve Bank direct costs for distributing currency.4

[SECTION]

The increases in Reserve Bank coin inventories and costs result 
              largely from a mismatch between the Federal Reserve's role as the 
              wholesale distributor of coins to depository institutions and public 
              demand for commemorative coins in small quantities. The Reserve 
              Banks' coin distribution system is designed to satisfy depository 
              institutions' needs for large quantities of coins for transactional 
              purposes. Publicity about new coin designs understandably encourages 
              consumers' interest in the coins, but so far much of the demand 
              has reflected individuals' desires to collect one or two coins of 
              each design. In this situation, frequent changes in design result 
              in large initial payments of new design coins to depository institutions 
              and the subsequent return of coins after the initial demand for 
              collectibles and ongoing transactional demand have been met.

[SECTION]

In addition, the Reserve Banks and depository institutions absorb 
              the costs of ordering and distributing coins that are broadly intended 
              for transactional use, including circulating commemoratives.5 
              Overall, the wholesale coin distribution system is designed to be 
              efficient for distributing large numbers of coins for transactional 
              purposes, but is less efficient at distributing the relatively small 
              number of coins needed to satisfy public demand for commemoratives.

[SECTION]

Dollars
Chart 1 at the end of my 
              statement shows that net payments of dollar coins surged to more 
              than $558 million in 2000, but dropped sharply in the succeeding 
              years. Publicity and efforts to stimulate demand caused net payments 
              of dollar coins to rise sharply in 2000, and payments continued 
              at an elevated, though decreasing, rate through 2002. During 2003, 
              total net payments of dollar coins to circulation were about $69 
              million, which represents a return to a level of annual payments 
              experienced in the five years before the introduction of the golden 
              dollar created temporary heightened demand. On March 31, 2004, Reserve 
              Banks held more than $92 million in dollar coins, approximately 
              the target inventory level for meeting transactional demand.

[SECTION]

Quarters
              The Federal Reserve has issued a new state quarter design every 
              ten weeks since January 1999. The public's interest in the widely 
              publicized state quarters caused the Reserve Banks to distribute 
              as many as 1.6 billion pieces of a single state quarter design in 
              the early days of the program.6

[SECTION]

Chart 2 shows that Reserve 
              Bank quarter inventories averaged nearly $621 million in 2002. Knowing 
              that existing inventories will satisfy transactional demand for 
              some time, the Reserve Banks, since 2002, have ordered 450 million 
              of each new state quarter, an amount that satisfies consumer demand. 
              Although this initiative reduced the growth of Reserve Bank quarter 
              inventories, on March 31, 2004, the Reserve Banks still held more 
              than $515 million in quarters, which is approximately $183 million 
              more than the target level for the upper limit of inventory needed 
              to satisfy transactional demand.

[SECTION]

Nickels
              The Federal Reserve and the Mint used lessons learned from the golden 
              dollar and state quarter programs to manage the distribution of 
              the new Westward Journey nickel designs. A number of factors seem 
              to have influenced a more orderly initial rollout of the first new 
              nickel in the program. Modest initial publicity about the new design 
              tempered public demand, and perhaps most importantly, there will 
              be no more than two new nickel designs this year and next. Transactional 
              demand for nickels is significantly lower than for quarters, allowing 
              the Reserve Banks to reduce their inventories of old design nickels 
              for months in anticipation of the issue of the new design. The Reserve 
              Banks initially ordered 300 million nickels, which were positioned 
              in most of their locations before the release date. The objective 
              was to make sufficient quantities available in the first four weeks 
              of circulation when demand is highest for commemorative coins. The 
              initial introduction has gone smoothly. It is still a bit early, 
              however, to assess fully the success of these measures in managing 
              inventories of nickels.

[SECTION]

Conclusion
              The Federal Reserve is working closely with the BEP and the Secret 
              Service to define the appropriate timing for introducing design 
              changes for the $100 Federal Reserve note, and to assess whether 
              to add additional counterfeit deterrence features to the $5 and 
              $10 notes. With regard to coins, it is important to recognize that 
              there are significant uncertainties about the effects of additional 
              changes to circulating coin designs, particularly to dollar coins. 
              The Federal Reserve's experiences since 1999 suggest that flexibility 
              in implementing new coin programs, along with care in publicizing 
              them, will allow us to address better the inventory and distribution 
              challenges of these programs. For example, the smooth introduction 
              of the first new nickel and experience thus far suggests that there 
              are advantages to releasing no more than two new designs per year. 
              This rate of introduction, at least for widely circulating coins, 
              allows the Reserve Banks more time to draw down inventories of old 
              designs and build up stocks of new designs for the initial distribution. 
              If experience shows over time that higher rates of introduction 
              can be managed effectively, the Reserve Banks and the Mint could 
              increase the rate of introduction in accordance with carefully prepared 
              plans. In addition, alternative distribution strategies that complement 
              wholesale distribution could be explored.

[SECTION]

Finally, we would advise against unduly stimulating public interest 
              in new designs, which appears to cause intense initial interest 
              and to place significant pressure on Reserve Banks and depository 
              institutions, with limited long-term changes in transactional demand. 
              We are very concerned that there could be significant public frustration 
              with depository institutions and the Reserve Banks if expectations 
              are not met for the distribution of new coins. If long-term demand 
              grows slowly, depository institutions and the Reserve Banks may 
              need to limit the amount of dollar coins that they order in order 
              to manage their inventories effectively. If and as long-term demand 
              does increase, the Reserve Banks will work closely with the Mint 
              to meet demand in accordance with their obligation to provide for 
              an elastic currency.

[SECTION]

Table 1 

Estimated Number of Golden Dollars in Circulation
              (millions of pieces, as of March 2004) 


 Number of Golden Dollars Minted for Circulation1

 1,400


 Estimated Number of Golden Dollars in Reserve Bank Inventory 
                  (75 percent of commingled inventory)
 (69)


 Number of Golden Dollar Coins Held in Mint Inventory
 (300)


 Estimated Number of Golden Dollars in Circulation
 1,031


 Estimated Number of Golden Dollars held by Depository Institutions
 n.a.


 Estimated Number of Golden Dollars held as Collectibles (67 
                  percent in 2000 Coinstar Poll)2
 (690)


 Estimated Number of Golden Dollars Available 
                  for Use in Transactions
 341


 Memo:


 $1 Notes in Circulation
 7,800


 Estimated Number of Golden Dollars Available for Use in Transactions 
                  as a Share of Golden Dollars Available for Use in Transactions 
                  and $1 Notes in Circulation3
 4.2%

[SECTION]

1   The estimated number of Susan B. Anthony coins minted 
              from 1976 through 2000 is 970 million, of which an estimated 23 
              million remain in Reserve Bank inventory commingled with golden 
              dollars (includes Reserve Bank inventory at coin terminals).
              2   The estimated 67 percent held as collectibles is applied 
              to the estimate of all golden dollars held outside of Reserve Bank 
              and Mint inventories, including an unknown amount of inventories 
              held by depository institutions.
              3   The GAO has reported that it believes the estimated 
              share is closer to one percent based on alternative survey methodology 
              (see Widespread Use, p. 37).

[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]

The Federal Reserve provides cash services to more than 10,000 of 
              the 19,000 banks, savings and loans, and credit unions in the United 
              States. The depository institutions that choose not to obtain cash 
              services directly from the Federal Reserve obtain cash services 
              through correspondent banks. Return to text

[SECTION]

It is difficult to forecast demand 
              for circulating coins. The normal demand for coins is highly seasonal 
              and reflects retail cycles. Demand for coin is highest during summer 
              and year-end holidays, and relatively low for the rest of the year. 
              Return to text

[SECTION]

New Dollar Coin Marketing Campaign 
              Raised Public Awareness but not Widespread Use. GAO-02-896, 
              September 2002. Return to text

[SECTION]

For comparison, the Reserve Banks also 
              introduced four new note designs during this period: Series-1996 
              $20 notes in 1999, Series-1996 $5 and $10 notes in 2000, and Series-2004 
              $20 notes in 2003. Return to text

[SECTION]

Virginia state quarters released in October 2000. Return 
              to text

[SECTION]

Return 
              to top

[SECTION]

2004 Testimony