

[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]

It is a pleasure to appear before this Subcommittee to discuss

     the supervision of bank sales practices on behalf of the Federal

     Reserve.  The recent publication of various survey results has

     focused attention on the performance of the banking and

     securities industries in educating customers about the critical

     differences between FDIC-insured deposits and uninsured

     investment products sold on bank premises.

[SECTION]

The Board has a long history of concerns about possible

     customer confusion between insured deposit instruments and

     uninsured investment products sold on bank premises.  We have

     worked and continue to work diligently to minimize customer

     confusion through a number of supervisory and educational

     initiatives.  These initiatives include coordination among the

     banking agencies to formulate clear and comprehensive guidelines

     governing the conduct of sales programs for nondeposit investment

     products offered on bank premises; the development of detailed

     examination procedures covering all aspects of sales of

     nondeposit products; and the development and implementation of an

     ambitious, multi-faceted education program for consumers and for

     banks.  We also have developed a productive relationship with the

     NASD that includes the coordination of examinations of bank

     affiliated broker dealers and the sharing of examination

     information in appropriate circumstances.  Finally, the banking

     agencies and the securities self-regulatory organizations have

     been working together to extend the same professional

     qualification standards found in the securities industry to bank

     sales personnel.

[SECTION]

Before discussing these matters in more detail, I believe it

     would be helpful to discuss briefly the continuing growth of the

     banking industry's sale of mutual funds and other nondeposit

     investment products that has occurred since early 1994 when the

     Board last testified on this subject.

[SECTION]

Mutual Fund Sales


     It is estimated that there were $3.1 trillion of mutual funds

     outstanding as of April 1996, up by about 50 percent from year-

     end 1994.  Of this amount, bank proprietary funds accounted for

     about $420 billion, about 60 percent of which were money market

     funds.  As you can see, the banking industry's share of total

     mutual funds outstanding is relatively small, particularly when

     money market funds are excluded.

[SECTION]

With respect to sales volume, excluding money market funds,

     banks sold about $32 billion of equity and debt funds in 1995, up

     from $29 billion in 1994.  These uninsured investment products --

     whose prices are most susceptible to changes in interest rates

     and other market factors -- generate the most concern that

     customers understand they could lose the principal that they

     invested.  Over the years, the banking agencies have consistently

     sought to protect and educate customers who might incorrectly

     believe that such investments are insured deposit instruments.

[SECTION]

Interagency Statement


     In February 1994, the banking agencies jointly issued an

     Interagency Statement on the Retail Sales of Nondeposit

     Investment Products.  The Interagency  Statement calls for banks

     selling such products on their premises to intensify their

     disclosure efforts to advise retail customers that the

     investments (i) are not deposits insured by the FDIC, (ii) are

     not guaranteed by the bank and (iii) are subject to the risk of

     loss of principal.  These three disclosures are quite similar to

     those that have been required by the Federal Reserve since 1972

     when it issued interpretations of Regulation Y pertaining to bank

     holding company sales of uninsured investment instruments, such

     as commercial paper.  Banks were required to provide disclosures

     that were intended to enhance customer awareness and minimize the

     mistaken notion that an investment product purchased on bank

     premises was the same as an insured deposit.

[SECTION]

The Interagency Statement also formalized the agencies'

     expectation that sales of investment products would take place in

     an area of the lobby distinctly separate from teller windows and

     other locations where deposits could be made.   Moreover,

     advertisements and account statements that contain information

     about both insured deposits and uninsured investment products

     must separate the information and provide the three disclosures I

     mentioned earlier.  Appropriate standards for training,

     compensation, suitability and supervision also were discussed.

[SECTION]

Finally, the Interagency Statement addressed the

     relationship between banks and third parties that sell investment

     products on bank premises -- by far the most typical scenario,

     since approximately 87 percent of all sales on bank premises

     occur through broker dealers.

[SECTION]

Examination Procedures


     Shortly after issuing the Interagency Statement, the Federal

     Reserve developed detailed examination procedures for use in

     state member banks that sell mutual funds to retail customers.

     The procedures are intended to enhance the supervision of these

     activities and to assure bank compliance with the guidelines

     contained in the Interagency Statement.  The procedures focus on

     the adequacy of disclosure, the physical separation of securities

     sales from deposit-taking activities, and other procedures

     intended to avoid customer confusion and ensure customer

     protection.

[SECTION]

In the two years since their implementation, our examiners

     have found that banks generally have procedures in place that

     comply with the guidelines in the Interagency Statement.  In some

     cases, examiners have identified material deficiencies in sales

     programs and instructed that they be corrected.  Although the

     Federal Reserve is prepared to initiate an enforcement action

     against any bank found to operate a sales program in a manner not

     consistent with principles of safety and soundness, in each case

     in which problems were discovered, the bank responded promptly.

     In some cases this included a temporary suspension of sale

     activities until deficiencies were corrected.  We have also found

     many banks to be pro-active in their efforts to operate

     investment sales programs in a safe and sound manner, and our

     staff answers frequent inquiries concerning compliance with the

     requirements of the Interagency Statement.

[SECTION]

NASD Coordination


     In January 1995, the banking agencies entered into an Agreement

     in Principle with the NASD to coordinate the supervision and

     examination of bank affiliated broker-dealers between the NASD

     and the banking agencies.  In the interest of functional

     supervision and to avoid duplicative efforts to supervise and

     examine entities subject to the legal jurisdiction of both the

     NASD and the banking agencies, arrangements were made to share

     examination schedules, coordinate examinations and share

     pertinent findings relevant to the retail securities sales

     activities of such firms.

[SECTION]

Pursuant to the Agreement, the Federal Reserve has worked

     closely with the NASD on several occasions to address supervisory

     issues arising from the examination of a state member bank and an

     affiliated broker-dealer that conducts retail sales activities on

     the bank's premises.  While the Federal Reserve has addressed the

     issues with the bank to seek corrective action in response to the

     problems, the NASD has addressed the matter with the affiliated

     broker-dealer thereby assuring that all parties to the business

     activity are responding to the supervisors' collective concerns.

[SECTION]

Most important, we have established effective lines of

     communication and a cooperative working relationship with the

     NASD.  We think that this relationship has made our supervisory

     programs more effective.

[SECTION]

NASD Proposed Rulemaking


     In late 1994, the NASD proposed new rules governing sales of

     securities on bank premises by member firms.  The Federal Reserve

     worked with NASD staff and provided extensive comments on the

     proposal, many of which were incorporated into its revised rule.

     The NASD also relied on the expertise of the many commenters as

     well as on the advice of a newly created committee of bank

     affiliated broker-dealers and third party providers that sell

     through banks.  The result is that the NASD's proposed rule now

     is generally consistent with the Interagency Statement with

     respect to the important issues of separation and disclosure.  We

     informally have communicated with NASD representatives on issues,

     such as use of confidential information, that need additional

     clarification.  The extensive communication in connection with

     this rulemaking demonstrates the commitment of both the industry

     and the regulators to achieve consistency in rules and guidelines

     governing this area.  Our goal is to maximize the benefits and

     minimize the burdens resulting from our joint jurisdiction in

     this area.

[SECTION]

Banking Agencies' Proposed Rulemaking on Professional

     Qualifications


     The staff of the banking agencies is nearing completion of a

     proposed rule to establish a professional qualifications program

     for banks selling securities to retail customers that closely

     follows securities industry requirements.  We believe the

     establishment of professional qualification requirements is in

     the best interests of the banking industry and of consumers.

[SECTION]

Briefly, the proposed rule would require bank employees to

     take and pass a securities industry professional qualification

     examination before beginning to sell securities to retail

     customers.  This will ensure that bank securities representatives

     are appropriately trained and educated as required by the

     Interagency Statement, and will enhance the ability of banks to

     serve their retail securities customers.  Continuing education

     requirements, such as those required of broker dealers and their

     employees, also would be imposed to assure continued familiarity

     with industry practices, securities issues and regulatory

     requirements.  Finally, bank sales personnel would be subject to

     a registration process under which employment and certain

     disciplinary and customer complaint information could be accessed

     by members of the public.  The banking agencies are working with

     the NASD to arrange for the NASD's new Central Registration

     Depository to maintain registration information filed with the

     banking agencies.

[SECTION]

In our discussions with the trade organizations and industry

     participants, we have encountered strong support for the proposed

     rule.  We will encourage the banking industry to participate by

     commenting on the proposal as the banking agencies work closely

     with the securities self regulatory organizations to bring this

     proposal to fruition.

[SECTION]

Market Trends Survey


     The FDIC recently released the results of its market trends

     survey which show that some banks and securities firms selling on

     bank premises need to improve their efforts to advise customers

     of the risks associated with nondeposit investment products.  We

     agree.  While there have been various consumer surveys that have

     shown an increasing awareness among the investing public that

     mutual funds and other investment products purchased at banks are

     not FDIC insured, more can be done.  For those investors who do

     not understand the risks associated with the lack of FDIC

     insurance, point-of-sale disclosures remain important.  In this

     regard, the Federal Reserve is working closely with the other

     federal banking agencies to promote disclosure by banks through

     the examination process, promote greater consumer understanding

     through education, and promote professional qualification

     standards for bank sales personnel.  We also will continue to

     work with the NASD to obtain further improvements in disclosure

     by broker dealers selling securities on banks premises.  As I

     noted earlier, approximately 87 percent of all securities sold on

     bank premises are through sales representatives of NASD

     registered broker dealers.

[SECTION]

Education Initiatives


     In an effort to help bank customers understand that not all

     products sold at banks are insured by the federal government, the

     Federal Reserve launched a multi-dimensional, national education

     program designed to deliver this message to consumers.  In

     addition to the Interagency Statement, for the past 18 months,

     the Federal Reserve has been engaged in an intensive education

     program aimed at both retail customers and bankers.  Mutual

     Funds:  Understand the Risks, as the program is known, is quite

     comprehensive.  It includes material for both a consumer seminar

     presentation and a banker compliance program; a video that can be

     used by bankers and other professionals in their dealings with

     retail customers; and compliance checklists to help bankers

     operate in a manner that complies with the Interagency Statement.

[SECTION]

The goal of the consumer seminar program is to help retail

     customers understand the differences between insured deposits and

     uninsured investments; the goal of the banker education program

     is to increase compliance with the Interagency Statement, which

     in turn will help inform and protect customers.  The program has

     been well received and has been discussed in numerous

     publications.  The American Bankers Association has featured the

     program in its newsletter and has broadcast the video on its

     Skylink System.

[SECTION]

To date, 70 consumer seminars and 47 banker training

     programs have been held around the country, reaching over 7,500

     consumers -- including a seminar in Spanish to an audience in

     Puerto Rico -- and nearly 1400 bankers.  Materials have been

     distributed to another 3,150 consumers via exhibits and town

     meetings sponsored by the Securities and Exchange Commission.

     Nearly 10,000 copies of the video, over 7,000 copies of the

     compliance checklists, and approximately 1,500 copies of the

     consumer outreach package have been distributed.  The materials

     have been shared with federal and state regulators and are

     available from the Board.  Selected materials have been

     translated into Spanish.

[SECTION]

These seminars and educational initiatives appear to work.

     A comparison of knowledge levels before and after a consumer

     seminar indicates that individuals seem to have a better

     understanding of the risks associated with nondeposit investment

     products: 91 percent know these products are not FDIC insured,

     compared to 65 percent prior to the seminar; 87 percent know

     these products carry the risk of loss of principal, compared to

     72 percent prior to the seminar.  Bankers who attended our

     training sessions report that they feel better able to comply

     with the Interagency Statement, especially with respect to

     disclosure and the physical separation of the investment sales

     area from deposit taking activities.

[SECTION]

We intend to do more.  We have completed a video public

     service announcement that will be distributed this summer to 145

     stations in the top forty national television markets.  Materials

     for the bankers training program are currently being updated and

     we hope to soon initiate another round of banker education

     programs.

[SECTION]

Conclusion


     The continuing growth in bank sales of mutual funds and other

     uninsured investments necessitates a commitment on the part of

     the banking industry and bank supervisors to the principle that

     effective disclosure of risks is in the best interest of the

     customer and the banking organization.  Banks can best assure

     that their sales staffs are operating in a manner consistent with

     this objective if they develop comprehensive training programs

     and effectively monitor compliance with policies and procedures

     governing sales of nondeposit products.  The Federal Reserve will

     continue to seek ways to strengthen its educational and

     supervisory programs to promote compliance with the guidelines in

     the Interagency Statement, so that bank customers are served in a

     safe and sound manner consistent with principles of customer

     protection.

[SECTION]



[SECTION]

Return to top

[SECTION]

1996 Testimony



Home | News and events 
Accessibility | Contact Us


Last update: June 26, 1996, 12:00 PM