Testimony of Governor Mark W. Olson
Power outages and the financial system 
        Before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the Committee 
        on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives
        October 20, 2003

[SECTION]

Introduction
        Chairwoman Kelly, Ranking Member Gutierrez, and members of the Subcommittee, 
        thank you for the opportunity to discuss the impact of the power outage 
        experienced by several states on August 14 and 15, and the impact of Hurricane 
        Isabel, which struck areas of the east coast--primarily the District of 
        Columbia, Virginia, North Carolina and Maryland--on September 18 and 19. 
        The Federal Reserve and the financial system, more generally, weathered 
        the power outage with few difficulties and critical operations were largely 
        unaffected. Markets and consumers remained calm. Hurricane Isabel did 
        not have a noticeable effect on the operation of the financial system, 
        although affected areas did experience a loss of power with collateral 
        effects similar to the power outage.

[SECTION]

Let me begin by emphasizing that it is no accident that the financial 
        sector performed well in responding to the outages. Throughout its history, 
        the banking industry has had many experiences with disruptions to normal 
        business operations and has learned from experience the need to provide, 
        maintain, and test appropriate backup facilities. This understanding has 
        been enhanced by the preparations leading up to the year 2000 concerns 
        about the resilience of our technology infrastructure and by the industry's 
        response to the terrible tragedy of September 11, 2001. From these experiences, 
        the industry has learned some lessons about providing sufficient backup 
        for power and the likely collateral effects of experiences such as the 
        recent outage. Moreover, because financial institutions rely on power 
        to run mission critical information systems, events such as the power 
        outage also underscore the need for institutions to integrate the risk 
        of a wide-scale disruption into their enterprise-wide risk management 
        strategies. Indeed, evaluating an institution's emergency preparedness 
        is an important component of the Fed's bank examination procedures.

[SECTION]

Impact on Financial Markets and Depository Institutions
        The August 14 power outage occurred just after the close of most U.S. 
        securities and futures markets. A rapid switch to backup power enabled 
        market utilities to complete end-of-day processing and settlement activities 
        without any material disruptions. Uncertainty was minimized when the markets 
        announced early Thursday evening that they would open on Friday. With 
        only one exception, the markets were able to open and close smoothly on 
        Friday. Also, some financial institutions in Manhattan closed early on 
        Friday to accommodate the limited availability of public transportation. 
        Otherwise, the markets, clearing and settlement organizations and market 
        participants were well prepared to operate on backup power at their offices 
        or from more remote backup sites. In terms of market volatility, there 
        was some limited--and understandable--volatility in energy-related futures 
        contracts and securities prices on Friday.

[SECTION]

The financial system did not experience any widespread or cascading liquidity 
        dislocations, in large part because payment and settlement systems operated 
        normally. The outage disrupted the federal funds market because most of 
        the volume in that market typically takes place late in the day, and the 
        market tightened considerably on Thursday afternoon. As a result, a small 
        number of banking organizations had to turn to the Federal Reserve's discount 
        window for overnight funds, and the Federal Reserve extended a larger 
        volume of discount window loans on Thursday than is usual. The federal 
        funds rate was volatile again on August 15, and borrowing remained somewhat 
        elevated. Conditions in the federal funds market returned to normal after 
        the weekend.

[SECTION]

I note that, if the outage or collateral effects had rendered a Federal 
        Reserve Bank inoperable, which it did not, the Federal Reserve has robust 
        contingency arrangements in place under which another Federal Reserve 
        Bank would have handled loan requests by depository institutions in the 
        affected District.

[SECTION]

Most depository institutions had backup power at their main offices, 
        larger branches, data centers and operations facilities. As a result, 
        the business of banking largely proceeded without interruption, although 
        retail banking (taking deposits, making loans and dispensing cash) was 
        disrupted at affected branch offices. It was also necessary to close some 
        retail branches whose security monitoring systems were impacted by the 
        outage in order to assure the security of cash, other assets, and personnel. 
        Most ATMs in the affected areas stopped working, although a few had backup 
        batteries that enabled them to function for a short period. Shortly after 
        the power went out, the Comptroller of the Currency signed an order authorizing 
        national banks, at their discretion, to close. Governors in a number of 
        affected states made similar proclamations for state-chartered depository 
        institutions. Probably not more than a few dozen depository institutions, 
        predominantly small, regional and community organizations and foreign 
        banking organizations, had to close all operations. In many instances, 
        critical personnel spent Thursday night in their offices to assure continuity 
        of operations on Friday. A number of organizations required only critical 
        staff to report to the office on Friday due to limited availability of 
        public transportation.

[SECTION]

I must say that we are extremely proud that the financial markets and 
        banking organizations were able to meet the various operational challenges 
        of the outage without any systemic effects or loss of confidence in our 
        financial system.

[SECTION]

Impact on Consumer Confidence
        The outage, which lasted less than 48 hours for most of the affected areas, 
        had no discernable effects on consumer confidence. Consumers were patient 
        and able to cope with the situation, including the temporary loss of access 
        to local branches and ATM machines. There was no sense of panic and there 
        were no unusual currency demands. We believe the public acted calmly in 
        large part because the government was quickly able to determine and announce 
        that the outage was not an act of terrorism. Moreover, consumers have 
        access to a broad range of retail financial services that are highly redundant 
        and substitutable. For example, even though consumers could not withdraw 
        cash from ATMs, they still could use checks. In many cases, they also 
        were able to access bank call centers to effect transactions and obtain 
        information. Electronic payments--deposits of paychecks and consumer transfers 
        of money, such as mortgage payments--were not disrupted.

[SECTION]

Impact on Federal Reserve Facilities and Operations
        The Federal Reserve System has always placed a high priority on business 
        continuity planning for its operations and services. The robust resilience 
        that has been established was demonstrated during the August power outage 
        and Hurricane Isabel. Throughout both of these recent events, the Federal 
        Reserve was able to continue critical operations, provide services without 
        interruption, and respond to market needs.

[SECTION]

The August power outage affected Federal Reserve Bank offices in New 
        York City; East Rutherford, New Jersey; Utica, New York; Cleveland; and 
        Detroit. Despite the loss of utility power, these offices were able to 
        continue operations without disruption using backup generators. Some of 
        the affected offices heightened security as a precaution, but no incidents 
        occurred. All Reserve Bank financial services operated normally during 
        the outage, and for some services, the Reserve Banks extended their operating 
        hours to meet the needs of depository institutions. For example, the Fedwire 
        funds transfer service, our large dollar payment system, continued operations 
        without interruption on the first day of the outage and opened on time 
        the next day. The Fedwire funds transfer closing time was extended on 
        both Thursday and Friday to accommodate Fedwire participants that were 
        experiencing outage-related problems and late exchanges of fed funds. 
        Similarly, the Fedwire securities service was unaffected on the first 
        day of the power outage, and it opened normally the next day. The closing 
        time for the securities service was extended on Friday to accommodate 
        participants affected by outage-related connectivity problems.

[SECTION]

In general, although extensions of Fedwire closing times were required 
        as a result of the power outage, there were no widespread problems among 
        Fedwire participants. Most Fedwire participants in affected areas shifted 
        quickly to backup power and were able to connect to Fedwire and continue 
        processing transactions. A few participants, particularly some foreign 
        banking organizations, experienced connectivity or processing problems. 
        The Reserve Banks provided support to these organizations through their 
        normal telephone-based, off-line processing service.

[SECTION]

Federal Reserve Bank check processing centers in the affected areas operated 
        on backup power, allowing check processing to proceed without interruption. 
        The volume of check processing was slightly lower than normal on Thursday. 
        Reserve Banks' inventories of currency were sufficient to meet depository 
        institution demand during and after the outage. Consumers did not seek 
        to withdraw unusually large amounts of cash during the outage--apparently 
        continuing to use the normal mix of retail payment methods, including 
        check and debit or credit cards at merchants that had backup power or 
        were outside of the affected area. The Federal Reserve was not asked to 
        provide currency outside of normal operating hours (after hours or weekend), 
        but was prepared to provide extra cash shipments to depository institutions, 
        if necessary. The Federal Reserve's Automated Clearinghouse retail electronic 
        payment system was unaffected by the blackout.

[SECTION]

There was no notable increase in the use of Federal Reserve intraday 
        credit on the days of the power outage. Average System aggregate and peak 
        intraday credit extensions were within reasonable levels. In addition, 
        there was no notable increase in either the size or number of overnight 
        overdrafts by banks across the Federal Reserve System.

[SECTION]

Regarding the Board of Governors, we believe that a power failure in 
        Washington, D.C., similar to the August outage, would have only a minimal 
        impact on the Board. We recently completed upgrades to our backup electrical 
        service to provide 100 percent of the power requirements for the Board's 
        two main buildings. The Board also maintains adequate supplies of water 
        to maintain operations. Priority contracts to deliver additional fuel 
        and water are in place. By yearend, backup generators will be installed 
        to provide hot water and heat in the event the Board's steam service is 
        disrupted. In the event of a wide-scale power outage, our biggest challenge 
        would be transportation. If the Metro or if traffic lights and street 
        lights were out, it is likely that we would ask only emergency and critical 
        staff to come to the Board's offices. Many of our professional staff can 
        "dial-in" to the Board via their personal computers and work from home. 
        In addition, the Board is reserving accommodations at hotels that have 
        emergency power systems for Board members and our most senior staff to 
        assure that they can get to the Board's offices in the event of a significant 
        transportation disruption. Finally, the Board has established a number 
        of business resumption and information technology backup sites within 
        and well outside of Washington, D.C., that could be activated if necessary.

[SECTION]

During Hurricane Isabel, the federal government was closed on Thursday, 
        September 18, and Friday, September 19, to assure the safety of employees 
        and accommodate the closure of public transportation systems. Emergency 
        and critical employees were able to report to the Board during those days 
        and over the weekend. Although much of the Washington, D.C., area lost 
        power for as long as eight days, the Board was not affected and our critical 
        business functions continued to operate.

[SECTION]

Agency Coordination
        The federal financial agencies have had a great deal of experience in 
        coordinating their activities during various financial crises, natural 
        disasters causing infrastructure disruptions, and terrorist attacks. None 
        of the agencies experienced operational problems from the outage. On Thursday 
        afternoon, the agencies immediately activated crisis communication protocols. 
        The Federal Banking Information Infrastructure Committee, made up of the 
        federal and state financial regulators and a representative from the Homeland 
        Security Council, held periodic conference calls throughout the day. The 
        Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, made up of the federal 
        regulators of depository institutions, also held a series of calls regarding 
        the status of supervised institutions. Each of the agencies followed internal 
        crisis communication protocols across their organizations. As in the past, 
        the ability of the agencies to share information and coordinate activities 
        assured a consistent and cohesive response.

[SECTION]

Lessons Learned
        The Federal Reserve's and the financial sector's performance during the 
        outage was very good, in part because power outages seem to occur periodically, 
        and we have worked hard to prepare for them by establishing emergency 
        backup power sources. However, lessons learned and opportunities for improvement 
        flow from every event. The August outage is no exception.

[SECTION]

One of the key lessons learned is that unexpected disruptions tend not 
        to be limited to a firm's internal operations or facilities--the proverbial 
        fire in the data center. In this era of unprecedented demand on the critical 
        infrastructure and the increased threat of terrorist and cyber attacks, 
        financial firms must plan how to recover critical operations and service 
        customers in the event of a wide-scale disruption that affects a cross 
        section of the industry as well as the critical infrastructure and the 
        accessibility of key staff.

[SECTION]

The importance of sharing timely and accurate information is a principle 
        that is underscored every time we have an experience that disrupts any 
        part of the nation's critical infrastructure and affects the public. This 
        includes careful coordination of messages between federal and state authorities 
        about steps being taken to protect the public and resolve the problem. 
        As I mentioned earlier, we believe that the government's announcement 
        within hours after the event that the outage was not a terrorist act made 
        a significant difference in how the public responded to the disruption. 
        Similarly, Thursday's announcements that the New York Stock Exchange and 
        NASDAQ were operating and would open on time on Friday did much to calm 
        investors and markets here and around the globe. Financial firms and markets 
        were forthright in advising stakeholders about their operational status 
        and steps being taken to recover affected operations to meet customer 
        needs.

[SECTION]

Another area where we learned important lessons pertains to the adequacy 
        of backup strategies for loss of power. For example, the sole use of batteries 
        as backup proved wholly inadequate, particularly for aspects of the critical 
        infrastructure, such as telecommunications switches. In most cases, banking 
        organizations had provided for sufficient backup power to continue critical 
        operations, such as payments, call centers, data processing and key management 
        activities. Many had established backup power for key geographically dispersed 
        retail branches. In other cases, firms learned that rented office space 
        did not have anything more than emergency lighting for evacuation purposes. 
        Others found that they had not provided backup power for in-house telecommunications 
        systems, so while the telecommunications systems leading into and out 
        of their building worked, their voice and data telecommunications systems 
        did not. We understand that some key telecommunications facilities had 
        not arranged for all of the critical functions at central office switch 
        locations to have necessary backup power. We also learned that many cell 
        phone towers are located on buildings that did not have emergency backup 
        power. Some firms that were able to switch over to generators found it 
        difficult to arrange for additional fuel because of transportation issues 
        and because of competing demands and delivery priorities. This may suggest 
        that the ability of some financial firms and the critical infrastructure 
        to continue to provide backup power to critical operations might have 
        degraded somewhat if the outage had extended through the weekend and into 
        the next business week. I would like to recognize the important efforts 
        of the Office of Emergency Management for New York City in working closely 
        with key critical infrastructure providers and market utilities to respond 
        to unanticipated backup needs and manage transportation issues.

[SECTION]

The power outage also emphasized the interdependencies across the critical 
        infrastructure and the cascading impacts that occur when one component 
        falters. The effects on transportation in Manhattan--with rapid transit 
        systems down and rail stations closed in the city--prevented key staff 
        at financial institutions from traveling to their offices and made it 
        difficult to obtain fuel deliveries for generators. In Detroit and other 
        cities, problems with water supplies necessitated the closure of buildings, 
        even those with backup power. Access to potable water also was limited 
        in a number of locations where pumping and sanitation stations did not 
        have backup power or did not have sufficient backup power to operate at 
        full capacity. The failure of steam generators in New York City caused 
        a number of organizations to shut down. Most importantly, we saw a number 
        of instances where telecommunications services were affected by insufficient 
        backup power. Some of these instances were within the control of the affected 
        financial firm, but many others were under the control of the telecommunications 
        providers.

[SECTION]

Conclusion
        The lessons learned from the power outage emphasize the importance of 
        preparing for a wide-scale disruption. They also emphasize the need for 
        a sound and resilient critical infrastructure because of the significant 
        collateral effects that can flow from a disruption in one component, in 
        this case electric power. The Federal Reserve and the financial sector 
        performed well during the outage. Nevertheless, we are encouraging financial 
        firms and critical infrastructure providers to review their own lessons 
        learned and, where appropriate, to take additional steps to achieve better 
        resilience from the effects of a future power outage.

[SECTION]

Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the effects of the power outage 
        and Hurricane Isabel. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may 
        have.

[SECTION]



[SECTION]

2003 Testimony