Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan
The Federal Reserve's semiannual monetary policy report
Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate 
July 18, 1996

[SECTION]

Before I take this opportunity to discuss the performance of the U.S.
economy and the conduct of monetary policy, I would first like to thank the
Chairman and the other members of this Committee for their support during my
confirmation process.  I am grateful for the opportunity to serve the nation in this
capacity for another term.

[SECTION]

Review of the First Half of 1996

     Nineteen-ninety-six has been a good year for the American economy.  By all
indications, spending and production were robust in the first half of this year.  GDP
increased at a 2-1/4 percent annual rate in the first quarter.  Partial data suggest a
significantly stronger increase in the second quarter as the economy, as expected,
accelerated out of its soft patch around the turn of the year.  During the second
quarter, industrial production rose at an annual rate of 5-1/2 percent, and
manufacturers are currently running their plant and equipment at utilization rates
that are a touch above their postwar averages.  About 1.4 million workers have been
added to nonfarm payrolls in the first six months of the year, and the
unemployment rate fell to 5.3 percent in June.

[SECTION]

Even though the U.S. economy is using its productive resources intensively,
inflation has remained quiescent.  The core inflation rate, measured by the consumer
price index less food and energy prices, at a 2.8 percent annual rate over the first six
months of the year, is about 1/2 percentage point slower than the same period one
year ago.  While increases in energy prices have boosted the overall CPI inflation
rate to 3.5 percent thus far in 1996, a partial reversal of the jump in petroleum
product prices observed in the first half appears to be in train.  I shall be discussing
in greater detail later some possible reasons for this favorable inflation experience
and offering some thoughts about how long it might last.

[SECTION]

Economic activity thus far this year has turned out to be better than many
analysts expected.  An important supporting factor, as I pointed out in February, was
favorable conditions in financial markets in the latter part of 1995 and early 1996.
Intermediate- and longer-term interest rates were low.  Among the influences
accounting for this were optimism about prospective budget-deficit reduction, small
easings of the stance of monetary policy in the second half of 1995 and early 1996,
and the possibility of a further moderation in credit demands owing to a potentially
soft economy.  Credit remained readily available, with banks and other lenders in
financial markets generally pursuing credit opportunities aggressively.  And a rising
stock market reduced the cost of capital to businesses and bolstered household
balance sheets.

[SECTION]

Looking forward, there are a number of reasons to expect demands to
moderate and economic activity to settle back toward a more sustainable pace in the
months ahead.

[SECTION]

First, the bond markets have taken a turn toward restraint this year as they
have responded to incoming data depicting an economy that was stronger than had
been anticipated.  Intermediate- and longer-term interest rates have risen from 1 to
1-1/4 percentage points since January.

[SECTION]

Second, the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets has appreciated
significantly on a trade-weighted basis against the currencies of other industrial
countries over the past year or so.  This appreciation importantly reflects the market
perception that the U.S. economy has been performing better than those of many of
our major trading partners.  The rise in the dollar helps to keep down price
pressures, but it also tends to divert domestic demand toward imported goods and
damp exports some.

[SECTION]

Third, the support to economic growth provided by expenditures on durable
goods, both for household consumption and business fixed investment, is likely to
wane in coming quarters.  Consumer spending in the past few years has been
boosted as households have made up for the purchases of big-ticket items that they
had deferred during the recession and the early, weaker phase of the recovery.  Five
years after the business-cycle trough, however, we should expect that this pent-up
demand has been largely exhausted.  Moreover, many households have built up
sizable debt burdens in recent years, and coping with debt repayments could hold
down their spending.  The business sector has been adding considerably to capacity;
opportunities to invest profitably in new capital should be increasing less rapidly as
final demand slows some.

[SECTION]

While these are all good reasons to anticipate that economic growth will
moderate some, the timing and extent of that downshift are uncertain.  We have
not, as yet, seen much effect of the rise in interest rates on, for example, the housing
market.  In many other aspects, financial market conditions remain quite supportive
to domestic spending, and the economies of many foreign countries are showing
signs of achieving more solid growth, which should help support our export sales.
Moreover, and perhaps of most relevance, a desire to build inventories could add
significantly to production in the near term.  Data available for 1996 through May
show that inventories were reduced relative to sales and are now fairly lean in many
important industries.  Although the use of just-in-time inventory and production
systems encourages purchasing managers to keep stocks lean, any evidence that
deliveries of previously ordered goods are being delayed for extended periods would
quickly alert companies to the need for higher safety stocks.  Indeed, indications of
some mounting delivery delays in June do raise warning flags in this regard.  The
reversal of earlier draw-downs in inventories, of course, could potentially impart an
important boost to incomes and production as we enter the second half of the year.
The economy is already producing at a high level--and some early signs of pressures
on resources are emerging, especially in the labor market.

[SECTION]

The Recent Behavior of Inflation

     There are, to be sure, legitimate questions about how much margin in resource
utilization currently exists.  Historically, current levels of slack, measured in terms of
either the unemployment rate or capacity utilization, have often been associated
with a gradual strengthening of price and wage pressures.  Yet, the recent evidence of
such pressures is scant.  I have already noted the lack of a distinct trend in the
growth rate of the so-called core CPI.  Increases in more comprehensive, and perhaps
more representative, chain-weighted measures of consumer prices, based on the
national income and product accounts, actually have continued to edge lower.  The
same is true of a still broader measure of price change, the chain-weighted price
index for gross domestic purchases, which covers both consumers and businesses.
Although nominal wage rates have accelerated recently, the rate of increase has been
lagging significantly behind that predicted on the basis of historical relationships
with unemployment and past inflation.  And domestic profit margins have held up
far later into this economic expansion than is the norm.

[SECTION]

Have we moved into a new environment where inflation imbalances no longer
threaten the stability and growth of our economy in ways they once did?  The
simple answer, in our judgment, is no.  But the issue is not a simple one.

[SECTION]

As we have discussed before, powerful forces have evolved in the past few
years to help contain inflationary tendencies.  An ever-increasing share of our
nation's workforce uses the tools of new technologies.  Microchips embodied in
physical capital make it work more efficiently, and sophisticated software adds to
intellectual capital.  The consequent waves of improvements in production
techniques have quickly altered the economic viability of individual firms and
sometimes even entire industries, as well as the market value of workers' skills.
With such fast and changeable currents, it is not surprising that workers may be less
willing to test the waters of job change.  Indeed, voluntary job leaving to seek other
employment appears to be quite subdued despite evidence of a tight labor market.
Because workers are more worried about their own job security and their
marketability if forced to change jobs, they are apparently accepting smaller
increases in their compensation at any given level of labor market tightness.
Moreover, a growing share of all output competes in an increasingly global
marketplace, allowing fixed costs to be spread over ever broader markets, promoting
greater specialization and efficiency, and enhancing price competition.

[SECTION]

As I indicated in February, these forces, to the extent that they are operative,
exert a transitory, not permanent, effect in reducing wage and price inflation.  These
trends leave the level of both wages and prices lower than historical relationships
would predict.  But, at some point, greater job security will no longer be worth the
further sacrifice of gains in real wages.  The growth of wages will then again be more
responsive to tightness of labor markets, potentially putting pressure on profit
margins and ultimately prices.  Moreover, the reductions in unit costs that are a
consequence of the ever expanding global reach of many companies must ultimately
be bound by the limits of geography.  To be sure, production and sales will continue
to be diversified across geographic areas, but the world can only figuratively shrink
so far.  At some point, possibly well into the future, increasing returns from ever-
greater globalization must also ebb.

[SECTION]

Perhaps reflecting these unusual influences, we have yet to see early signs in
prices themselves of intensifying pressures, despite anecdotal and statistical evidence
that the amount of operating slack in our economy has been at low levels by historic
standards for some time.  Among the encouraging indicators, industrial commodity
prices have remained roughly flat and the list of reported shortages of materials has
been exceptionally small.  This pattern is consistent with the view that American
businesses, by and large, have felt comfortable that inflation has been subdued and
offers little evidence of the advance buying and expanded commitments that would
come if businesses were expecting significant price pressures in the reasonably near
future.

[SECTION]

Nonetheless, there are early indications that this episode of favorable inflation
developments, especially with regard to labor markets, may be drawing to a close.
The surprising strength in the employment cost index for wages and salaries in the
first quarter raises the possibility that workers' willingness to surrender wage gains
for job security may be lessening.  Wage data since March have been somewhat
difficult to read.  Average hourly earnings clearly accelerated in the second quarter.
However, in looking at those figures, one must be mindful that they can reflect not
only changes in wage rates but also shifts in the composition of employment.  And
in recent months, a significant part, although not all of the pickup, has been
accounted for by a tendency for employment to shift to relatively high-pay
industries, such as durable goods manufacturing.  Whether such shifts also imply a
correspondingly higher level of output per worker will determine whether unit labor
costs also accelerated to impart upward pressures to price inflation.  Increases in pay,
of course, are not inflationary so long as they are matched by gains in productivity.
Without question, we would applaud such trends, which increase standards of living.
However, wage gains that increase unit costs and are eaten up by inflation help no
one, and ultimately place economic growth in jeopardy.

[SECTION]

Clearly, in this environment, the Federal Reserve has had to become especially
vigilant to incipient inflation pressures that could ultimately threaten the health of
the expansion.  The relatively good inflation performance of the past few years, as
best we can judge, owes in part to transitional forces that are only temporarily
damping the wage-price inflation process.  We cannot be confident that we can
ascertain when that process will come to an end.  This makes policy responses more
difficult than usual, because, as always, the impact of policy will be felt with a
significant lag.  Of course, if the economy grows so strongly as to strain available
resources, transitional forces notwithstanding, history persuasively indicates that
imbalances will develop that will bring the expansion to a halt.

[SECTION]

The FOMC's Outlook for the Remainder of 1996 and 1997

     The forecasts of the governors of the Federal Reserve Board and presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks for economic performance over the remainder of this year
and the next reflect the view that sustainable economic growth is likely in store.
The growth rate of real GDP is most commonly seen as between 2-1/2 and 2-3/4
percent over the four quarters of 1996 and 1-3/4 to 2-1/4 percent in 1997.  Given
the strong performance of real GDP in the last two quarters, this outcome implies
slower growth in the second half of this year.  Nonetheless, for the remainder of this
year and the next in these projections, the unemployment rate remains in the range
of the past 1-1/2 years.  Inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in
the consumer price index, is expected to be 3 to 3-1/4 percent in 1996.  The
governors and bank presidents, however, view the prospects for inflation to be more
favorable going forward.  The expected reversal of some of the recent run-up in
energy prices would contribute to that result, but policy makers' forecasts also reflect
their determination to hold the line on inflation.  The central tendency of their
inflation forecasts for 1997 is 2-3/4 to 3 percent, returning to the range from 1991
to 1995.

[SECTION]

The Pursuit of Price Stability

     We at the Federal Reserve would welcome faster economic growth, provided
that it were sustainable.  As I emphasized last February, we do not have firm
judgments on the specific level or growth rate of output that would engender
economic strains.  Instead, we respond to evidence that those strains themselves are
developing.  Whatever the long-run potential for sustainable growth, we believe that
a necessary condition for achieving it is low inflation.  As a consequence, the Federal
Reserve remains committed to preventing a sustained pickup in inflation and
ultimately achieving and preserving price stability.

[SECTION]

Price stability is an appropriate and desirable goal for policy, not only because
it allows financial markets and the economy to work most efficiently, but also
because it most likely raises productivity and living standards in the long run.
Specifically, in an inflationary environment, business managers are distracted from
their basic function of building profits through prudent investment and cost control.
My own observation of business practices over the years suggests that the inability
to pass cost increases through to higher prices provides a powerful incentive to firms
to increase profit margins through innovation and greater efficiency, which boosts
productivity and ultimately standards of living over time.  Holding the line on
inflation, thus, does not impose a speed limit on economic growth.  On the contrary,
it induces the private sector to focus more on efforts that yield faster long-term
economic growth.

[SECTION]

In this context, we can readily understand why financial markets welcome
sustained low inflation.  Uncertainty about future inflation raises the risks associated
with investing for that future.  Lowering that uncertainty by keeping inflation down
diminishes those risks, so that all commitments concerning future income become
more valuable.  During periods of low inflation, stock and bond prices tend to reflect
the higher valuation that comes from harnessing our physical plant more efficiently
to provide improved opportunities in the future, including higher wages and profits.
What investors fear, what all Americans should fear, are inflationary instabilities.
They diminish our ability to provide the wherewithal for the standards of living of
the next generation and the retirement incomes of our current work force.  The
interests of investors as expressed in bond and stock markets do not conflict with
those of average Americans--they coincide.

[SECTION]

In order to realize the benefits of low and declining inflation, Federal Reserve
policy has, for some time now, been designed to act preemptively--as I indicated
earlier--to look beyond current data readings and base action on its assessment of
where the economy is headed.  Policy restraint initiated in February 1994 followed
from the judgment that unchanged policy would encourage subsequent inflationary
imbalances that would ultimately cut short the economic expansion.  The three
easing steps in the past year were instituted when we anticipated that inflationary
imbalances would be less threatening and that lower rates would be compatible with
promoting sustainable economic expansion.  Similarly, I am confident that the
Federal Open Market Committee would move to tighten reserve market conditions
should the weight of incoming evidence persuasively suggest an oncoming
intensification of inflation pressures that would jeopardize the durability of the
economic expansion.

[SECTION]

The Ranges for the Debt and Monetary Aggregates

     The Committee selected provisional ranges for the monetary aggregates in
1997 that once again encompass the growth rates associated with conditions of
approximate price stability, provided that these aggregates act in accord with their
historical relationships with nominal income and interest rates.  These ranges are
identical to those endorsed for 1996--1 to 5 percent for M2 and 2 to 6 percent for
M3.  The Committee reaffirmed its range of 3 to 7 percent for the debt of the
domestic nonfinancial sectors for this year and chose the same range provisionally
for next year.  The Committee's expectations for inflation and nominal GDP
expansion in 1996 and 1997 suggest growth of the monetary aggregates at the upper
ends of their benchmark ranges as a distinct possibility this year and next, though
debt should be in the middle portion of its range.

[SECTION]

The experience of the first part of the 1990s--when money growth diverged
from historical relationships with income and interest rates--severely set back most
analysts' confidence in the usefulness of M2.  Recently, there have been tentative
signs that the historical relationship linking the velocity of M2--or the ratio of
nominal GDP to the money stock--to the cost of holding M2 assets has reasserted
itself.  For now, though, the Committee is satisfied with watching these
developments carefully, waiting for more compelling evidence that M2 has some
predictive content in forecasting current and prospective spending.  Such evidence,
however, at best will only accumulate gradually over time.

[SECTION]

Budgetary Policy

     Monetary policy is, of course, only one factor shaping the macroeconomic
environment.  I thus would be remiss if I did not again emphasize the critical
importance to our nation's economic welfare of continuing to reduce our federal
budget deficit.  We have made significant and welcome progress on this score in
recent years.  But unless further legislative steps are taken, that progress will be
reversed.  Inevitably, such changes will require addressing the consequences for
entitlement spending of the anticipated shift in the nation's demographics in the
first few decades of the next century.  Lower budget deficits are the surest and most
direct way to increase national saving.  Higher national saving would help to lower
real interest rates, spurring spending on capital goods so as to put cutting-edge
technology in the hands of more American workers.  With a greater volume of
modern equipment at their disposal, American workers will be able to produce goods
that compete even more effectively on world markets.

[SECTION]

The rally in capital markets last year that trimmed as much as two percentage
points from longer-term Treasury yields was almost surely, in part, a response to the
developing positive dialogue on deficit reduction.  While the backup in intermediate-
and longer-term market interest rates this year has mostly reflected the unexpected
vigor of economic activity, market participants must also have been struck by the
dying out of serious discussions that might lead to a bipartisan agreement to
eliminate the budget deficit over time.

[SECTION]

Conclusion

     Mr. Chairman, our economy is now in its sixth year of economic expansion.
The staying power of the expansion has owed importantly to the initial small size
and rapid correction of emerging imbalances, reflected in part in the persistence of
low inflation.

[SECTION]

To be sure, the economy is not free of problems.  But as we address those
problems, policy makers also need to recognize the limitations of our influence and
the wellspring of our success.  The good performance of the American economy in
the most fundamental sense rests on the actions of millions of people, who have
been given the scope to express themselves in free and open markets.  In this, we are
a model for the rest of the world, which has come to appreciate the power of market
economies to provide for the public's long-term welfare.

[SECTION]

July 1996 Humphrey-Hawkins report | 1996 Testimony

[SECTION]

Home |
News and events |
Monetary policy
Accessibility | Contact Us

Last update: July 21, 1998, 10:15 AM