

[SECTION]

In recent months, in response to very tight supplies, prices 
              of natural gas have increased sharply. Working gas in storage is 
              currently at very low levels relative to its seasonal norm because 
              of a colder than average winter and a seeming inability of increased 
              gas well drilling to significantly augment net marketed production. 
              Canada, our major source of imported natural gas, has had little 
              room to expand shipments to the United States, and our limited capacity 
              to import liquefied natural gas (LNG) effectively restricts our 
              access to the world's abundant supplies of gas.

[SECTION]

Our inability to increase imports to close a modest gap between 
              North American demand and production (a gap we can almost always 
              close in oil) is largely responsible for the marked rise in natural 
              gas prices over the past year. Such price pressures are not evident 
              elsewhere. Competitive crude oil prices, after wide gyrations related 
              to the war in Iraq, are now only slightly elevated from a year ago, 
              and where spot markets for natural gas exist, such as in Great Britain, 
              prices exhibit little change from a year ago. In the United States, 
              rising demand for natural gas, especially as a clean-burning source 
              of electric power, is pressing against a supply essentially restricted 
              to North American production.

[SECTION]

Given the current infrastructure, the U.S. market for natural gas 
              is mainly regional, is characterized by relatively longer term contracts, 
              and is still regulated, but less so than in the past. As a result, 
              residential and commercial prices of natural gas respond sluggishly 
              to movements in the spot price. Thus, to the extent that natural 
              gas consumption must adjust to limited supplies, most of the reduction 
              must come from the industrial sector and, to a lesser extent, utilities.

[SECTION]

Yesterday the price of gas for delivery in July closed at $6.31 
              per million Btu. That contract sold for as low as $2.55 in July 
              2000 and for $3.65 a year ago. Futures markets project further price 
              increases through the summer cooling season to the peak of the heating 
              season next January. Indeed, market expectations reflected in option 
              prices imply a 25 percent probability that the peak price will exceed 
              $7.50 per million Btu.

[SECTION]

Today's tight natural gas markets have been a long time in coming, 
              and futures prices suggest that we are not apt to return to earlier 
              periods of relative abundance and low prices anytime soon. It was 
              little more than a half-century ago that drillers seeking valuable 
              crude oil bemoaned the discovery of natural gas. Given the lack 
              of adequate transportation, wells had to be capped or the gas flared. 
              As the economy expanded after World War II, the development of a 
              vast interstate transmission system facilitated widespread consumption 
              of natural gas in our homes and business establishments. On a heat-equivalent 
              basis, natural gas consumption by 1970 had risen to three-fourths 
              of that of oil. But natural gas consumption lagged in the following 
              decade because of competitive incursions from coal and nuclear power. 
              Since 1985, natural gas has gradually increased its share of total 
              energy use and is projected by the Energy Information Administration 
              to gain share over the next quarter century, owing to its status 
              as a clean-burning fuel.

[SECTION]

* * * * *

[SECTION]

Recent years' dramatic changes in technology are making existing 
              energy reserves stretch further while keeping long-term energy costs 
              lower than they otherwise would have been. Seismic techniques and 
              satellite imaging, which are facilitating the discovery of promising 
              new natural gas reservoirs, have nearly doubled the success rate 
              of new-field wildcat wells in the United States during the past 
              decade. New techniques allow far deeper drilling of promising fields, 
              especially offshore. The newer recovery innovations reportedly have 
              raised the average proportion of gas reserves eventually brought 
              to the surface. Technologies are facilitating Rocky Mountain production 
              of tight sands gas and coalbed methane. Marketed production in Wyoming, 
              for example, has risen from 3.4 percent of total U.S. output in 
              1996 to 7.1 percent last year.

[SECTION]

One might expect that the dramatic shift away from hit-or-miss 
              methods toward more advanced technologies would have lowered the 
              cost of developing new fields and, hence, the long-term marginal 
              costs of new gas. Indeed, those costs have declined, but by less 
              than might have been the case because much of the innovation in 
              oil and gas development outside of OPEC has been directed at overcoming 
              an increasingly inhospitable and costly exploratory physical environment.

[SECTION]

Moreover, improving technologies have also increased the depletion 
              rate of newly discovered gas reservoirs, placing a strain on supply 
              that has required increasingly larger gross additions from drilling 
              to maintain any given level of dry gas production. Depletion rates 
              are estimated to have reached 27 percent last year, compared with 
              21 percent as recently as five years ago. The rise has been even 
              more pronounced for conventionally produced gas because tight sands 
              gas, which comprises an increasing share of new gas finds, exhibits 
              a slower depletion rate than conventional wells.

[SECTION]

Improved technologies, however, have been unable to prevent the 
              underlying long-term price of natural gas in the United States from 
              rising. This is most readily observed in markets for natural gas 
              where contract delivery is sufficiently distant to allow new supply 
              to be developed and brought to market. That price has risen gradually 
              from $2 per million Btu in 1997 for delivery in 2000, and presumably 
              well beyond, to more than $4.50 for delivery in 2009, the crude 
              oil heating equivalent of rising from less than $12 per barrel to 
              $26 per barrel. Over the same period, the distant futures price 
              of light sweet crude oil has edged up only $4 per barrel and is 
              selling at a historically rare discount to comparably dated natural 
              gas.

[SECTION]

Because gas is particularly challenging to transport in its cryogenic 
              form as a liquid, imports of LNG have been negligible. Environmental 
              and safety concerns and cost have limited the number of LNG terminals 
              and imports of LNG. In 2001, LNG imports accounted for only 1 percent 
              of U.S. gas supply. Canada, which has recently supplied a sixth 
              of our consumption, has little capacity to significantly expand 
              its exports, in part because of the role that Canadian gas plays 
              in supporting growing oil production from tar sands.

[SECTION]

Given notable cost reductions for both liquefaction and transportation 
              of LNG, significant global trade is developing. And high gas prices 
              projected in the American distant futures market have made us a 
              potential very large importer. Worldwide imports of natural gas 
              in 2000 were only 26 percent of world consumption, compared to 50 
              percent for oil.

[SECTION]

Even with markedly less geopolitical instability confronting world 
              gas than world oil in recent years, spot gas prices have been far 
              more volatile than those for oil, doubtless reflecting, in part, 
              less-developed global trade. The updrift and volatility of the spot 
              price for gas have put significant segments of the North American 
              gas-using industry in a weakened competitive position. Unless this 
              competitive weakness is addressed, new investment in these technologies 
              will flag.

[SECTION]

Increased marginal supplies from abroad, while likely to notably 
              damp the levels and volatility of American natural gas prices, would 
              expose us to possibly insecure sources of foreign supply, as it 
              has for oil. But natural gas reserves are somewhat more widely dispersed 
              than those of oil, for which three-fifths of proved world reserves 
              reside in the Middle East. Nearly two-fifths of world natural gas 
              reserves are in Russia and its former satellites, and one-third 
              are in the Middle East.

[SECTION]

Creating a price-pressure safety valve through larger import capacity 
              of LNG need not unduly expose us to potentially unstable sources 
              of imports. There are still numerous unexploited sources of gas 
              production in the United States. We have been struggling to reach 
              an agreeable tradeoff between environmental and energy concerns 
              for decades. I do not doubt we will continue to fine-tune our areas 
              of consensus. But it is essential that our policies be consistent. 
              For example, we cannot, on the one hand, encourage the use of environmentally 
              desirable natural gas in this country while being conflicted on 
              larger imports of LNG. Such contradictions are resolved only by 
              debilitating spikes in price.

[SECTION]

* * * * *

[SECTION]

In summary, the long-term equilibrium price for natural gas in 
              the United States has risen persistently during the past six years 
              from approximately $2 per million Btu to more than $4.50. The perceived 
              tightening of long-term demand-supply balances is beginning to price 
              some industrial demand out of the market. It is not clear whether 
              these losses are temporary, pending a fall in price, or permanent.

[SECTION]

Such pressures do not arise in the U.S. market for crude oil. American 
              refiners have unlimited access to world supplies, as was demonstrated 
              most recently when Venezuelan oil production shut down. Refiners 
              were able to replace lost oil with supplies from Europe, Asia, and 
              the Middle East. If North American natural gas markets are to function 
              with the flexibility exhibited by oil, unlimited access to the vast 
              world reserves of gas is required. Markets need to be able to effectively 
              adjust to unexpected shortfalls in domestic supply. Access to world 
              natural gas supplies will require a major expansion of LNG terminal 
              import capacity. Without the flexibility such facilities will impart, 
              imbalances in supply and demand must inevitably engender price volatility.

[SECTION]

As the technology of LNG liquefaction and shipping has improved, 
              and as safety considerations have lessened, a major expansion of 
              U.S. import capability appears to be under way. These movements 
              bode well for widespread natural gas availability in North America 
              in the years ahead.

[SECTION]

2003 Testimony