

[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]



[SECTION]

I am pleased to appear before the Committee on Banking, Housing,

     and Urban Affairs to discuss actions that the Federal Reserve has

     taken over the past several years to address the problem of

     "prime bank" financial instruments and related illegal financial

     schemes.  The Federal Reserve has taken an active role in

     alerting the banking industry and the public about the illicit

     activities of individuals trying to peddle nonexistent financial

     instruments here in the United States and abroad, and we have

     worked closely with the law enforcement community to assist their

     efforts to investigate and prosecute these wrongdoers.

[SECTION]

"Prime Bank" Schemes and Advisories


     In late 1993, Federal Reserve staff was alerted by domestic and

     foreign banking organizations that their names were being used

     for apparently unlawful purposes in connection with the attempted

     sale of questionable financial instruments.  We were also

     contacted by individuals who had been approached to purchase

     questionable, highly complex investment-type instruments.

[SECTION]

The transactions that were brought to our attention involved

     notes, guarantees, letters of credit, debentures, or other

     seemingly legitimate types of financial instruments being issued

     by an unidentified "prime bank," or by a domestic or foreign

     banking organization that was said to be keeping the issuance of

     the instruments secret.  The various proposals that involved

     "prime bank"-related financial instruments had similar

     characteristics:

[SECTION]

(1)  the investor could realize extremely high rates of

               return on an instrument described as risk free;

[SECTION]

(2)  the investor was buying a part of a large tranche of

               securities or financial instruments that was almost

               fully subscribed by other investors or was part of a

               "roll program" that automatically put the investor into

               an investor group of some sort;

[SECTION]

(3)  the financial instrument that was being purchased was

               traded on a worldwide secret exchange;

[SECTION]

(4)  the documentation related to a "prime bank" investment

               was extremely complex and difficult to comprehend;

[SECTION]

(5)  a secure escrow account maintained at a "prime bank" or

               by an attorney would be used to hold the investors'

               funds and payments into this account would be made by

               some sort of "key tested telex" message;

[SECTION]

(6)  the financial instruments being issued were in formats

               purportedly approved by the International Chamber of

               Commerce or fully sanctioned by the Federal Reserve,

               the World Bank, or some other known international

               organization.

[SECTION]

Some "prime bank" schemes appeared to be targeted to

     individuals and companies who needed loans.  These potential

     borrowers were advised that their loans would be funded by a

     "prime bank" provided they paid a large, up-front fee to secure

     the funding.  Board staff believed that the proposed payment of

     unrealistic rates of return was indicative of a fraudulent scheme

     and contacted several banks to make sure that legitimate banking

     organizations were not referring to themselves as "prime banks"

     or using financial instruments that in any manner referred to

     "prime banks."   Once assured that there was no legitimate use of

     the term "prime bank" or lawful use of a "prime bank" instrument,

     we drafted an interagency advisory on "prime bank" schemes and

     began to work through the Department of Justice's Interagency

     Bank Fraud Working Group in order to issue the pronouncement.

     Coordination efforts to address the problem were also initiated

     with some of the other 12 agencies participating in the Working

     Group, including the Securities and Exchange Commission, as well

     as with international law enforcement authorities, including

     Britain's Scotland Yard and Department of Trade and Industry.

[SECTION]

On October 21, 1993, the Federal Reserve and the other

     federal banking agencies issued the first interagency advisory

     entitled "Warning Concerning  Prime Bank  Notes, Guarantees, and

     Letters of Credit and Similar Financial Instruments."  The

     advisory, which is attached to my prepared statement, informed

     banking organizations and the public that the Federal Reserve and

     the other regulators know of no legitimate use of any "prime

     bank"-related financial instrument.  The advisory also asked the

     public to contact agency representatives if approached to invest

     in a "prime bank" instrument or pay an advance fee to secure a

     loan funded by a "prime bank" note, letter of credit, or other

     type of questionable financial instrument.  The banking agencies

     committed to refer cases of potential illegal conduct associated

     with supposed "prime bank" documents to a senior official in the

     Washington, D.C., office of the SEC and to the local offices of

     the FBI because almost all "prime bank" schemes appeared to

     involve fraud, including securities fraud.

[SECTION]

The advisory prompted numerous calls and letters about

     "prime bank" matters.  Between late 1993 and mid-1995, hundreds

     of inquiries were received from individuals who had been

     solicited to purchase "prime bank" financial instruments, from

     investment advisors considering potential investments on behalf

     of clients, and from banking organizations that had received

     faxed solicitations.  Calls and letters came from as far as South

     Africa, Germany, Australia, France, and Singapore.  The

     correspondents were highly suspicious of the proposed schemes and

     many indicated they wanted to check with the government "to be

     sure" that their suspicions were justified.  During this period,

     Board staff assisted federal prosecutors in New Jersey, Oklahoma,

     Virginia and in other districts to investigate and eventually

     convict individuals for "prime bank"-associated federal criminal

     law violations.

[SECTION]

Calls and letters to the Federal Reserve regarding "prime

     bank" scams began to slow in late 1995 and early 1996 but,

     unfortunately, began again in recent months.  The new inquiries

     have focused on the role of the Federal Reserve itself, with

     callers asking whether the Federal Reserve registers agents in

     certain European countries, licenses traders on secret "prime

     bank" exchanges, clears the transfers of "prime bank" securities,

     or oversees investment plans comprised of "prime bank"

     instruments.

[SECTION]

The Federal Reserve responded with a new advisory, released

     on June 11, 1996, to dispel any misconceptions that the Federal

     Reserve plays a role in "prime bank"-related investments.  The

     recent advisory is also included with my statement.

[SECTION]

The Effect of "Prime Bank" Schemes


     The Federal Reserve is not aware that banking organizations

     supervised by the Board or any other federal banking agency have

     engaged, or otherwise knowingly participated in, any illegal

     "prime bank"-related conduct.  We know of no domestic bank that

     has suffered losses from "investments" in "prime bank" financial

     instruments or from any other enterprise involving such

     instruments.  Most "prime bank" scams entail multi-million dollar

     investments, and as such we are not aware of losses to

     individual, as opposed to institutional, investors.  Some well-

     known organizations, however, have suffered large losses because

     of their investments in phony "prime bank" financial instruments.

[SECTION]

In criminal matters involving "prime bank" schemes, U.S.

     Attorney's Offices have prosecuted and won cases under existing

     criminal statutes, and the SEC has been able to freeze accounts

     of wrongdoers and obtain other injunctive relief.

[SECTION]

Legislation


     The Committee has asked the Federal Reserve to comment on the

     need for additional legislation addressing misconduct by

     fraudsters selling these instruments.  The Board generally defers

     to the law enforcement community and to the securities regulators

     regarding legislative proposals such as S. 1009, the "Financial

     Instruments Anti-Fraud Act of 1995" proposed by Senator D'Amato.

     It is our view, however, that continuing successful prosecution

     of these cases is crucial in sending a message to potential

     "prime bank" fraudsters.  Thus, new statutory authority enhancing

     law enforcement's ability to prosecute wrongdoers may prove

     useful.

[SECTION]

I am happy to address any questions you may have about the

     Federal Reserve's efforts to address the problems associated with

     these illegal financial schemes.

[SECTION]



[SECTION]

Return to top

[SECTION]

1996 Testimony



Home | News and events 
Accessibility | Contact Us


Last update: July 17, 1996, 12:00 PM